# Abstract Data Types

## General Notes

- Any implementations of an Abstract Data Type have a strict set of functions they must support
- An Abstract Data Type is designed from the perspective of a user, not an implementer
- As programmers, we are often given a task in non-technical terms, and it is up to us to figure out how to actually implement the higher-level idea. How do we choose what tools to use to perform this task? Typically, the job at hand has certain requirements, so we scour the documentation of our favorite language (or alternatively just search on Google and pick the first StackOverflow result, who are we kidding) and pick something that has the functions that satisfy our job's requirements.
- For example, say we want to store the grades of numerous students in a class in a way that we can query the data structure with a student's name and have it return the student's grade. Clearly, some type of a "map" data structure, which maps "keys" (student names) to "values" (grades), would do the trick. If we're not too worried about performance, we don't necessarily care about how the data structure executes these tasks: we just care that it gets the job done.
- What we are describing, a model for data types where the data type is defined by its behavior from the point of view of a user of the data (i.e., by what functions the user claims it needs to have) is an Abstract Data Type (ADT).
- An Abstract Data Type is defined by what functions it should be able to perform, but it does not at all depend on how it actually goes about doing those functions (i.e., it is not implementation-specific). A Data Structure, on the other hand, is a concrete representation of data: it consists of all of the nuts and bolts behind how the data are represented (how they are stored in memory, algorithms for performing various operations, etc.).
-  Time complexities of these functions completely depends on how the programmer chooses to implement the "set"